Welcome to another Mathologer video. You're all familiar with the diagram over there, right?
Yes, of course. It's a diagram powering the Mathologer logo.
Yes, but that's not really it, right? I'm sure for the majority of people watching this video,
this diagram will scream Pythagoras. If this is not the case, ask for your money back from your
and definitely keep on watching for, hopefully, life-changing experience.
And even for those of you who've treasured this twisted square diagram since primary school,
keep watching. Today will be about all the secrets of this iconic diagram
that not even most professional mathematicians will be familiar with. But first, a bit of revision
to get us all on the same page. a squared plus b squared equals c squared. You all know the drill.
Take any right angle triangle with short sides a and b and hypotenuse
c and the area of the square on the hypotenuse c squared is equal to the combined area of
the squares on the two shorter sides a squared plus b squared. A stunning visual proof of this
fundamental theorem runs like this. Take four copies of the triangle and combine them into a
large square like this. Okay, this large square is partly covered by the four triangles.
The area that's not covered is what? Well, c squared, of course. Now move one of the little
triangles just a little bit. How large is the blue area now? Well, still c squared, of course.
How about now? Still c squared. And this will be true no matter how we position the triangles
inside the blue square as long as they don't overlap, right? Okay, ready for a big aha moment?
Move the triangles one more time. No overlaps. And so the area is still c squared. However,
this area is also a squared plus b squared. And so a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
What an amazingly simple and beautiful proof. What a killer punchline. Don't you think? All right.
Now, how about this? The area of the large square is equal to the area of the little square
plus the area of the four triangles. Okay, the area of the large square is a plus b squared.
The area of the little square is c squared. And the area of one of the right angle triangles is
one half base thumbs height, one half a times b. Now simply go on algebra autopilot. There's two
over there. We expand and we cancel and a squared plus b squared equals c squared. Fantastic again.
Well, maybe not quite as fantastic as the first proof, but still fantastic. Just out of interest,
can you let me know in the comments which of these two twisted square proofs you were already
familiar with and when and where you first came across them? Will be interesting. Of course,
most kids never get to see either proof, which in my book is a crime which should entitle them to
get their money back from their schools. As well, most school textbooks that feature a proof only
mention the second less spectacular algebraic one. Go figure. Anyway, no matter how pretty these
proofs are, that's really all there is to this iconic diagram, right? Wrong. There's more, lots
and lots more. There's from our four square theorem, the tri-thagorean theorem, the bug chasing vertex,
vortex and much more ready to be amazed. Here we go. The twisted square diagram has been around
for a couple thousand years and features in the earliest documented proof of Pythagoras theorem,
which is part of an ancient Chinese manuscript on astronomy and mathematics.
Well, Pythagoras neither discovered his theorem nor was he the first to prove it,
and so to have a theorem named after him is really a bit of a scandal in mathematics. Anyway,
let's have a look inside the manuscript. What you find there is pages upon pages of this. Well,
maybe not surprising. Lots and lots of Chinese characters. However, eventually we come across
a page featuring our diagram. Well, that's definitely our diagram, but there's a bit more
to this drawing, isn't there? There, a second very different twisted square diagram made up
of the same four right angle triangles. Let us push them around a bit. In fact,
the second diagram can also be used to prove Pythagoras theorem in two different ways,
one algebraic and one based on shuffling triangles. Just looking at areas, again,
we have four times the area of the triangle plus the area of the little square is equal to the
area of the large square. Expressing this identity in terms of a, b and c and some algebra autopilot
spits out a squared plus b squared equals c squared in pretty much exactly the same way as before.
On the other hand, the c squared area of the large square stays unchanged when we move some
of the triangles. And so c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared also very pretty. And in a
way, this proof is even slicker than the first triangle shuffle proof, since we only have to
shuffle two of the triangles instead of all four. The Chinese drawing also features a grid.
What's that grid for? Well, it's clear that no matter what right angle triangle you start with,
everything we set so far will stay true. Of course, this is very important. Otherwise,
none of our proofs would actually count as a general proof of Pythagoras theorem.
On the other hand, the grid shows that in our example, we're dealing with a super famous
right angle triangle. Can you see it? Yep, it's a 345 right angle triangle.
3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared. 345, the prototype Pythagorean triple, a
triple of integers that satisfies the equation a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
Since we've all been familiar with the 345 triples since kindergarten,
we're taking the fact that such triples exist for granted, that the existence of such
integer triples is in fact a little bit of a miracle is illustrated by Fermat's last theorem,
which says that if you change the exponent to 3, 4 or any other larger integer, the equation will
not have any positive integer solutions. But of course, the wonderful 345 Pythagorean triple
does exist. And you get more of these wonderful integer triples by simply changing the number
of lines in the grid. There, doubling the number of grid lines gives this. 6 squared plus 8 squared
equals 10 squared. Easy, and tripling gives this. But there are also other essentially different
Pythagorean triples, and many of you will be familiar with this particular one, right? 51213,
5 squared plus 12 squared equals 13 squared. Anyway, there are infinitely many essentially
different Pythagorean triples. And let me just mention that we know how to construct all of them
pretty easily. And of course, we can use any of these triples to make up one of our diagrams.
But let's stick with 345. Alright, let's have another close look. How many squares are there?
Well, there's this one, and that one. And one more. The area of the little square is one squared.
Okay. The area of this green square is 5 squared. And what about the largest one? Well,
3 plus 4 is 7, and so the area is 7 squared. Cool. Now, what is 25 minus 1? 25 minus 1? That's
24, of course. Okay. What about 49 minus 25? You got it? 49 minus 25. It's also 24. Interesting.
Both differences are the same. Is that a coincidence? What do you think? Well, no. That we get the
same difference is always true. And it's also really easy to see. Have a look. What's the difference
between blue and green? Well, that's just the area of four copies of our right angle triangle.
And how about the difference between the green and the orange? Same thing, of course. Let's shuffle
them around. Very pretty, isn't it? So, what this means is that within the square numbers,
we can find three equally spaced squares, and that every Pythagorean triple translates into three
such special squares. Okay. So, that's what we get for 345. And here is what we get if we double
the number of grid lines. There. Now, in maths, an arithmetic progression is a sequence of numbers
in which consecutive terms differ by a fixed amount like 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, etc., with a common
difference of 2 or 3, 6, 9, 12, etc., with a common difference of 3. And so, another way of expressing
this equal difference business at hand is to say that there are arithmetic progressions of length
3 within the squares. Okay. This fact was already known to the great 17th century mathematician
Pierre de Fermat, whose super famous last theorem I mentioned just a moment ago. And this fact prompted
Pierre de Fermat to ask a very natural question. What do you think that question was? Well, he
asked, are there any longer arithmetic progressions hiding in the squares? Right? Here we've got four,
plus 96 is 100, plus 96 is 196. What if we add another 96? Do we get another square? That would
then be an arithmetic progression of length 4. Well, no, because 196 plus 96 is 292, and 292 is not a
square. But in general, are there arithmetic progressions of four squares or five squares? How
long can such progressions be? What do you think? Well, this is a tricky one. Let me try to confuse
you a little bit more. In 2004, the mathematical superstars Ben Green and Terry Tau approved
that there are, in fact, arithmetic progressions of arbitrary lengths among the primes.
Insane, right? Here's one of lengths 5 that we've been staring at all your life without realizing
it. There, 5 plus 6 is 11, plus 6 is 17, plus 6 is 23, plus 6 is 29, and arithmetic progression of
five primes was common difference 6. Anyway, how long can arithmetic progressions of squares get?
Well, Fermat figured out that, in fact, 3 is the surprising answer. You cannot do any better
than the many sequences that our diagram produces from Pythagorean triples.
Allegedly, Fermat also had a proof, but nobody knows what that proof looked like exactly.
A situation similar to that with his famous last theorem, where he also claimed to have a proof,
but none was found in his writings. Here's a quote from the well-known Australian number
theorist, Alf van der Poorten. Here's what he writes. I looked this up in reference 3 and found
at page 54 the unhelpful footnote, Fermat could show by descent that one cannot have four squares
in arithmetic progression. Jerry Meissen has pointed me to a reference, but the argument there seems
utterly soulless. And I remain searching for a decent descent argument warranty report to you.
Now, that's really funny. I decided recently that such a proof was most readily found on a previously
blank page of my notebook. So he decided that everything seen so far is useless. He's going
to make up a proof himself. And here's what he ended up writing in his notebook. This is the
nicest and most natural proof of Fermat's four square theorem that I'm aware of. And it may very
well be similar to what Fermat came up with a couple hundred years ago. I won't go into the
nitty gritty details here. Let me just say that this proof features the kind of infinite descent
argument that we've already encountered a couple of times in mythology videos. At its core is a
well-known construction of all known Pythagorean triples. And so it appears that this proof may
have had its origin in the little Pythagorean triple construction that this talked about.
Now Pythagoras theorem has been around for thousands of years. And so you would think that
everything worth discovering about Pythagoras theorem was discovered a long time ago. Far from
it. What I'll talk about now was only discovered around 20 years ago. Okay. So instead of twisting
squares, we now twist equilateral triangles. Let's try to mimic as much as possible what we did
before. So instead of right angle triangles, we start with a triangle that features a 60 degree
angle. Make three copies. Arrange them into a large equilateral triangle. Okay. Next we have to
shuffle the triangles around. Now after a bit of fiddling, it turns out that for this to prove
something interesting, we have to get rid of one of the red triangles first. There. Go away triangle.
Go away, go away, go away. Now shuffle. Not much of a shuffle, but anyway. Looks promising.
As before, side by side or two diagrams amount to an equation.
Cancel two triangles each on the left and right sides of this equation.
So what's left? Well, we've got one equilateral triangle each for the three sides A, B and C of
our original triangle. Let's name the areas of these triangles like this. Okay. Using these names,
our identity looks like this. Watch it. It's coming. Oh, fantastic. A trithagorean theorem
for 60 degree triangles. Note that in the real trithagoras, the A and B areas add up exactly
to the C area. That's almost also works in this trithagorean theorem, right? So here we've got
A area plus B area equals C area plus, well, there's a little bit of a correction term,
a really nice correction term, the area of the original triangle T. Okay. For the next surprise,
let's make the 60 degree angle into a right angle, but keep the equilateral triangles on the sides.
Experts, what am I about to say? Well, we can make the identity on top work by simply removing the
T. Really? Yes. Pithagoras not only works for squares, but also for equilateral triangles.
A area plus B area equals C area. Exactly. In fact, even better, Pithagoras works for
three suitably scaled copies of any shape, glued to the sides of a right angle triangle.
Semi circles, capital M for mythology, anything whatsoever. I already talked about this at length
in a separate video on Pithagoras theorem a couple of years ago. Also, check out that video.
60 is 90 minus 30. On the other hand, 90 plus 30 is 120. And it turns out that just like 60 degree
triangles, 120 degree triangles also have a nice Trithagorean theorem. The only difference between
these two Trithagorean theorems is that the plus correction term turns into a minus correction term.
Also nice, isn't it? Anyway, back to 60 degree triangles. Well, our Trithagorean theorem is
very cute. However, it is definitely not as applicable as Pithagoras theorem, right? If you
give me the length of any two sides of a right angle triangle, Pithagoras immediately tells me
what the third length is. Not so with our Trithagorean identity. However, there's also a nice
a squared plus b squared equals c squared Pithagoras counterpart for 60 degree triangles
that is just as applicable as its 90 degree original. Here it is.
a squared plus b squared is equal to c squared plus a times b. Super nice. And also very easy to
see why this is true if you know the cosine rule, a generalization of Pithagoras to general triangles
taught as part of Trigonometry. Well, that's all good. But here's another nice way to conjure up
this identity, which also shows that it's simply another way of writing our original
Trithagorean identity. Let's call the area of the equilateral triangle with sides of lengths one,
f. There, f is that red area. Then the 60 degree triangle with sides a and b bound in the 60 degree
angle has area, really easy, a times b times f. Yeah, that guy has area a times b times f.
Bit of a challenge. Can you see at a glance why this is the case? If you can, let us know in the
comments. Anyway, this means t is equal to a times b times f. What about the area of the a triangle?
Well, this is an equilateral triangle. And so all its sides are equal to a. And so its area is
a times a times f, a squared times f. And similarly with b and c equilateral triangles.
Now it comes next. Can you see it? Of course, we just divide by f and we're done.
Slicker. What about Trithagorean Chipples counterparts to 345 and company?
Are there 60 degree triangles with integer sides? What do you think?
Well, he should be able to answer that one. Are there 60 degree triangles with integer sides?
Of course there are. Any equilateral triangle with integer lengths sides will work. 1 1 1,
2 2 2 and so on. Obvious. What about other 60 degree triangles? Not so obvious, but yes,
there are such triangles. In fact, our example over there is such a triangle.
387 works. Check for yourself that this triple really satisfies the equation 3 squared plus
8 squared equals 7 squared plus 3 times 8. Well, if I ever change the mythology logo from a twisted
square to a twisted equilateral triangle, I'll base it on this special 387 triple of integers.
Something like this. What do you think? Time for a change of logo? Anyway, the official name for
our Trithagorean integer triple is Eisenstein triples named after the 19th century genius
mathematician Gotthold Eisenstein. Just like with Pythagorean triples, there are infinitely many
essentially different Eisenstein triples. Okay, well, before I move on, here's something really,
really cute. Overlaying these two triangles immediately gives us second Eisenstein triple.
Can you see that? No? Well, let's just do it, right? The sides of this blue 60 degree triangle are
7, 8 and 8 minus 3 equals 5. There, a new Eisenstein triple, 5, 8, 7. Nice, huh? Here's
something else that you like. I'm pretty sure you like this one. Okay, super imposing. These two
triangles gives the red 120 degree triangle as integer sides. This triangle has sides 7, 3 and
8 minus 3 is 5. Also, to get the ABC identity 420 degree triangles, just change the plus in front
of the AB to a minus. Also super pretty. Anyway, do these triangular twists to the original Pythagorean
theorem get your seal of approval? I sure hope so. Okay, so we have this pair of diagrams for
equilateral triangles and this very similar pair for squares. We can make these two pictures look
even more similar by relocating these two triangles there. Now a bit of a facelift.
Very pretty, don't you think? Anyway, while preparing for this mythology video, I discovered
a third type of diagram that nicely complements this pair. What does this diagram show? Well,
the white triangles are all the same. There are 12 of them on the left and 6 on the right.
So let's cancel 6 on both sides. Do the usual thing here.
Also beautiful, the Hexagorean theorem. Ready for another nice aha moment? Okay,
divide by 6. What's a regular Hexagon divided by 6? Well, let's see.
Here, the Hexagorean theorem for 120 degree triangles divided by 6 is the Trithagorean
theorem for 120 degree triangles. You saw it first on mythology. As I already mentioned,
all the twisted triangle shuffle stuff only seems to have been around for about 20 years.
Over there is a painting of amateur mathematician Wayne Roberts created in 2003,
which is one of the possible origins of the nice triangle shuffle proof of our Trithagorean theorem.
This painting was also the inspiration for the way I purified the diagrams in this chapter.
Back to the original twisted square diagram. Have a look at this.
What you've just witnessed is yet another really weird
proof of Pythagoras based on the twisted square diagram, right? It's another proof.
The top two squares have the same area as the bottom square,
because it's possible to chop the top squares into 10 pieces that can be reassembled exactly
into the large square at the bottom. There. Really wonderful and unexpected, isn't it?
With an added bonus miracle being the overall shape at the top and bottom dissections,
which mirror the two diagrams in our original proof. Of course, with all these visual proofs,
it's very important to chase around the angles and lengths in these diagrams to make sure that
looks are not deceiving. That things really fit together exactly as suggested by our pictures,
for all possible choices of right angle triangles. Anyway, I checked. Trust me.
And if you don't trust me, check for yourself. Here's another miraculous
chop up proof based on the twisted square diagram.
There are a number of interesting properties of right angle triangles that appear to be very
mysterious at first sight. But once you remember the twisted squares, it all becomes crystal clear
in a flash. Here are three great examples. Okay, take any right angle triangle and attach the square
on the hypotenuse. Next, draw the line that cuts the right angle in two. Okay, now, no matter what
right triangle you started with, this line will always pass through the center of the square.
Now, if you encounter this property in the wild, it will most likely come as quite a surprise.
But then you remember your twisted squares. And now everything's clear. Drawing one of the
diagonals of the big square. Obviously, this diagonal cuts the right angles in half.
And it is also clear that it passes through the center of the square. Ta-da! Nice. I hope you
still experienced a bit of an aha moment despite me advertising the twisted squares
as the solution in advance. Okay, second property. And here's how it's usually presented. Start with
a square and insert a right angle triangle like this. Make three copies and attach them
to the remaining sides. Now, what's the special property? Pretty obvious, right? All right
angles are on a line. Very pretty. Again, very hard to see why this should be the case unless you
remember our twisted squares. One more. There are hundreds of different proofs of Pythagoras
theorem. One of them is by the 20th American president, James Garfield. It runs like this.
Start with a right angle triangle. Make a copy and complete the resulting figure into a trapezium.
Now, as usual, calculate the area for this trapezium in two different ways. First, using the formula
for the trapezium and then by adding up the area of the three triangles. Then some algebra
order pilot and outcomes a squared plus b squared equals c squared. All by now a complete no-brainer,
I hope. But doesn't this trapezium remind you of something? Yes, of course. It's just
half our favorite diagram. And really, on close inspection, President Garfield's proof
is exactly our original algebraic proof divided by two. And so really nothing new. But of course,
I can see why it's great to be able to tell kids that being good at maths and becoming an American
president can go together. And so for propaganda purposes, let's also say in the future that
an American president came up with a new proof of Pythagoras theorem.
Having fun so far? Right. Let's start with this special case of our twisted square diagram with
the little blue square twisted 45 degrees. Let's squish the diagram a bit. Okay. Okay. Shuffling
the triangles as usual is still possible. There, there, there. Let's say the sides of the blue
rectangles are root a and root b. Why root a and not just a? Well, don't worry about it.
Whatever the lengths are in the diagram, we can certainly write them as square roots of some
numbers. Now, the area of one of the two rectangles is root a times b. Okay. Now, what about the
diagram on the right? Using Pythagoras, we can see that one side of the blue rhombus is root
a plus b. Okay. The blue area on the left is two times root a times b,
which is equal to the area of the blue rhombus on the right, as usual. But this area is definitely
not larger than that of the square with sides of exactly the same lengths. Right.
Well, the area of both the rhombus and the square are based on side. Both shapes have
the same base, but the height of the square is larger and so its area is also larger.
Clear this way, right? What's the area of the square? Easy.
Now, this is a very famous inequality between the two most useful types of averaging two positive
numbers, the geometric mean on the left and the arithmetic mean on the right. So what we've just
proved is that the geometric mean of two positive numbers is always less or equal to their arithmetic
mean. Okay, let's modify what we just started with. First on the left, then reshuffled on the right,
we get this tilted parallelogram. Now, if we do exactly the same as we just did with a different
sort of labeling, we get another super famous inequality, the so-called Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
We need a bit more maths background to be able to appreciate that one. And so I'll just do an
animation of the relevant bits at the end of this video for those of you in the know and interested.
But I also would like to show you one more surprising completely different application that
everybody watching will be able to appreciate. To set it up, we modify things a bit more. First,
we swap the two diagrams and now we adjust so that all the sides of the parallelogram
are equal to one. Then we'll write things change like this. Okay, now pencil in some of the angles.
Then the length of the sides of our triangles will be the signs and cosines of these angles,
like this. There, there, there, and there. I'm pretty obvious that this is correct, right?
Let's shuffle them over to the other side. That's where we need them. Also, we can find the two
angles again inside the blue parallelogram. Let's just do that too. Here, it comes around here,
the better shows up here. And so this angle is just alpha plus beta. Okay, in terms of areas of
the blue regions, what have we got? Well, on the right, it's completely obvious. What about on the
left? Let's have a look. Still animating around, almost there. The area of the parallelogram is
equal to base times height. Base is one and height. Well, that's just the sign of alpha plus beta,
right? And so the area, base times height, is this.
Very nice. And so in total, we get the addition formula for our sign. How nice is that? Do you
see that one coming? Let's finish off with something totally different. Start with a square and
place some bugs on the corners of the square. Let's say that at some point in time, each bug
will start running towards the bug it is facing right now, that all four bugs will always be running
at the same constant speed towards each other. With a setup like this, what are some natural
questions to ask? Well, how about this? Will the bugs ever catch up to each other? If they do,
how long will their journeys be? What are the equations of their journeys? Which way will
they be facing when they meet? How do things change if we use different starting configurations,
numbers of bugs, etc. Lots of mathematical fun to be had here. Some of these problems and their
very surprising answers were made popular by the famous mathematics popularizer Martin Gardner
in his column in the July 1965 column of the Scientific American. Let me show you a nice
twisted square way to get a feel for what's going on here and for how to come up with answers to
some of our questions. First, ask the bugs to forget about Martin Gardner's instructions. Instead,
ask them to run along one-fifths of the sides of the square and then stop, like this. Now,
ask them to turn towards each other like this. Whoa, twisted squares! And we've arrived back
at the starting configuration just with a slightly smaller rotated square. Now, let's ask the bugs
to repeat everything they've done so far over and over. So, cover one-fifths, turn towards
each other, cover one-fifths, turn towards each other and so on. Go again, go again and pretty
spectacular, isn't it? Now, two simple observations. First, because of the symmetry of everything
that's happening here, the bugs will form a square at all times, pretty clear, right? Second,
from the way we repeat the same overall movement over and over, it follows that from one square to
the next, we are rotating the orientation of squares by the same angle and we scale the size
down by the same factor. Also pretty easy, right? Conclusions from this. Since we scale down by a
fixed factor, the size of the squares will decrease, but we'll do so infinitely often. Hence, there
are infinitely many squares and the sizes will shrink to zero. And since the orientations of
consecutive squares differ by a fixed angle and there are infinitely many squares, on their journey,
ideal bugs will circle the center infinitely often, right? So, there's one angle and we do this
infinitely, so it goes do, do, do, do, do. That's a bit unexpected, isn't it? Now, does this mean
that the bug's path is infinitely long? It's circling infinitely often, so is it infinitely long?
Actually, no. Although these paths wind infinitely often around the center, they are of finite
lengths. Let's figure out how long one of these paths actually is. If the side of the square is
one unit long, a bug walks one-fifths of one and one-fifths of one is 0.2. The remaining distance
is 0.8. Okay? We find the side lengths of the smaller square with Pythagoras. It's approximately
0.825. Since the outer side lengths 1 shrinks to 0.825 in the second square, we conclude
that 0.825 is the factor by which the squares shrink. This allows us to figure out the lengths of
all the segments of one of the bug's paths, right? Since the first segment is 0.2 long,
the second segment is 0.2 times 0.825 long. To get the length of the next segment,
we just have to multiply by 0.825 again, there, squared, and so on. There, cubed, power four.
This means that the total length of the path is this. All right. Now, the infinite series in the
brackets is a geometric series. Since you're still here, chances are you know the formula for the sum
of a geometric series by heart. It's just 1 over 1 minus the scale factor. With this, the overall
length of the path pens out to be this. And this is approximately 1.14, which is a little bit longer
than one of the sides of the square. Interesting. Now, we've reduced the fraction of the sides
covered by the bugs from 0.2 to 0.1. The numbers change like this. Uh-huh. The length of the path
is even closer to 1. In fact, if we let the fraction of the sides covered by the bugs go to 0,
the picture will turn into the picture that corresponds to the original Martin Gardner
problem. And the length of the paths of the bugs in the original problem can be seen to be exactly
1. How nice an answer is that? By the way, this was the picture on the cover of Martin Gardner's
Scientific American article. Again, the bugs pass exactly as long as the sides of the square.
It's a pretty surprising answer, yes. But in hindsight, is there maybe a simpler way to see why
the bugs path should be exactly as long as their original distance apart? Again, leave your thoughts
in the comments. I could report on many more ingenious results as far as bugs chasing bugs
are concerned, but let's call it a day for today. If you're interested in more neat details about
any of the topics touched upon today, check out the links in the description of this video.
Okay, one last nice insight. Early on, we encountered two types of twisted square diagrams,
this one and that one. There's actually a third one in this third diagram to triangle's overlap.
Here, then, is your final puzzle. Let's say A is equal to one-half and B is equal to one,
as in this example. What is the area of the square in the middle? Once again,
leave your hopefully surprising answers in the comments. Okay, and that's it from me for today.
As promised, I'll leave you with an animation of the proof for the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
in the case of two numbers, A and B.